Fusion Developer Guide: Architecture, CI/CD, and Extensibility
1. Compiler Pipeline Stages
The Fusion compiler (fusionc) operates as a modern, multi-stage pipeline, leveraging Rust for safety and LLVM for performance.
Stage
	Rust Component
	Core Responsibility
	Front-End
	lexer, parser
	Converts source code (.fu) into a Concrete Syntax Tree (CST).
	Middle-End
	semantic_analyzer
	Enforces the Borrow Checker rules, performs Type Checking (including generics/traits), and verifies compiler attributes (@constant_time).
	Back-End
	codegen
	Translates the optimized AST into LLVM IR, applying target-specific passes (e.g., WASM, x86-64, CUDA offload).
	Tooling
	lsp, pkg
	Provides IDE integration and dependency management built on the middle-end analysis results.
	2. Extending the Compiler (Implementing New Attributes)
To integrate new hardware or compiler behaviors, developers extend the Attribute enum in src/ast/mod.rs and update the relevant checker and code generator.
Example: Adding a new Memory Attribute
1. AST Update: Add Attribute::ManualMemory to src/ast/mod.rs.
2. Semantic Check: In semantic_analyzer::check_block, when Attribute::ManualMemory is detected, disable the default Garbage Collection logic and enforce stricter resource cleanup checks.
3. Codegen Update: In codegen::generate_declaration, map manual memory allocation calls to C-style malloc/free through LLVM FFI imports.
3. Continuous Integration and Security Hardening
All Fusion projects must integrate with the standard CI pipeline, which includes mandatory security steps.




 Image of DevSecOps Pipeline 

Shutterstock
Explore
CI Stage
	Tool/API
	Enforcement Action
	Build
	fusionc --target wasm32-wasi
	Multi-target compilation and performance benchmarking.
	SAST/SCA
	fusion security scan
	Scans source code for vulnerabilities and checks dependencies for CVEs using the SCAAnalyzer.
	Fuzzing
	fusion fuzz --target-fn parse_input
	Automatically generates and runs malformed inputs against designated targets to prevent crashes and buffer overflows.
	Compliance
	LLVM Passes
	Verification that the @constant_time attribute correctly generated side-channel resistant assembly.
	4. Contribution Guidelines
* Codebase: Primarily written in Rust for stability and performance.
* Testing: All pull requests must pass 90%+ code coverage verified by fusion test --coverage.
* Licensing: Fusion is distributed under the Apache 2.0 License.