This is a very creative way to think about the problem! You are trying to solve a complex issue with an economic or hydraulic analogy (pooling resources to balance things out).

It shows you are thinking deeply about how independent agents (threads) interact.

However, in computer science, your proposed solution of a "lending pool to give the slower one a boost" will not solve a data race. In fact, it might make debugging them even harder.

Understanding why your idea won't work is actually the best way to understand what a data race really is.

Here is a breakdown of the misconception, the reality of the hardware, and why we use the solutions we use.

1. The Core Misconception: It's Not About Speed
Your idea rests on the assumption that data races happen because one thread is "too slow" and misses a synchronization deadline with another thread. You are imagining that if they arrived at the exact same time, they would "sync."

The Reality: A data race isn't caused by threads having different speeds. It is caused by lack of ordering rules.

In a modern computer, you have absolutely no guarantee about exactly when a thread will execute its next instruction.

The operating system scheduler might pause Thread A to let Thread C run.

Thread B might stall because it has to fetch data from slow RAM instead of the fast cache.

The Analogy: The Four-Way Stop

Imagine a busy four-way intersection with stop signs.

A data race is like two cars ignoring the stop signs and driving through at the same time. They crash (corrupt memory).

Your proposal suggests: "If car B was slower than car A, why don't we give car B a turbo boost so it gets to the intersection at the same time as car A?"

If you give car B a turbo boost, and they still ignore the stop signs, they are just going to crash faster and harder. The problem wasn't their relative speed; the problem was that neither yielded to the other.

2. Why a "Boost" Doesn't Fix the Race
Let's look at a classic data race scenario in code. Two threads are trying to increment a counter initialized to 0.

C

// Shared variable
int counter = 0;

// Thread A runs this:
counter = counter + 1;

// Thread B runs this:
counter = counter + 1;
Incrementing seems like one step, but the CPU sees three separate steps:

Read the current value from memory into a register.

Add 1 to the register value.

Write the new register value back to memory.

The Race Scenario:

Thread A reads 0.

The OS scheduler interrupts Thread A and lets Thread B run.

Thread B reads 0.

Thread B adds 1 (result is 1).

Thread B writes 1 to memory.

The OS scheduler resumes Thread A.

Thread A adds 1 to the value it read back in step 1 (which was 0). Result is 1.

Thread A writes 1 to memory.

Result: The counter is 1, even though it should be 2. We lost an update.

Applying your solution: If we give "slower" Thread A a "boost," it doesn't change the fact that the operating system can interrupt it right after step 1. Even if Thread A is running on a 5GHz processor and Thread B is on a 1GHz processor, the interrupt timing is random. A boost doesn't stop the interruption; it just makes the instructions between interruptions happen faster.

As long as those three steps (read-modify-write) can be interrupted by another thread doing the same thing to the same data, you have a race.

3. The Real Solution: Mutual Exclusion (Locks)
Since we cannot control the speed of threads or when the OS interrupts them, we must use a different approach. We must force them to wait their turn.

We don't need a "lending pool" for speed; we need a lock (like a traffic light or the stop sign in our analogy).

Rust

// Rust style pseudo-code with a Mutex (Mutual Exclusion)

let counter = Mutex::new(0);

// Thread A
{
    let mut data = counter.lock().unwrap(); // Stop at the red light
    *data += 1;                             // Drive through intersection
} // Unlock (light turns green for others)

// Thread B
{
    // If A is inside the lock, B must wait here, no matter how fast B is.
    let mut data = counter.lock().unwrap(); 
    *data += 1;
}
A lock forces ordering. It ensures that once a thread starts the read-modify-write sequence, no other thread can touch that data until the sequence is finished.

4. Where Your Idea Does Apply in Real Systems
While your idea doesn't solve data races, concepts like "pools" and "boosting" do exist in computing, but they solve performance problems, not correctness problems.

Priority Boosting: Operating systems sometimes give a temporary priority boost to a "slow" thread that is holding a lock that higher-priority threads are waiting for. This is called solving "Priority Inversion." It doesn't prevent races (the lock does that), but it prevents system slowdowns.

Thread Pools and Work Stealing: If one CPU core has a long queue of tasks and another core is idle, the idle core can "steal" work from the busy core's pool. This balances the load, making the overall system faster.

Summary
A data race is a crash caused by a lack of traffic rules at an intersection. Giving one of the cars a boost won't prevent the crash. The only solution is to install traffic lights (mutexes) or build an overpass (designing the system so they don't share data at all, like in Rust's ownership model).